Cave Dweller's Crate Digger

An offline python toolkit for compulsive retro music hoarders that shun modern tools and streaming services
but aren't afraid of locally hosted llms and have a decently organized music mp3 library like a time capsule to 1999.

CDCD provides;
Offline local analysis - for your entire music library, your crates stay in your cave free of outside judgement.
Taste profile - generates a math taste profile based on your music's metadata
Wise DJ - interact with your library with a local llm, you can ask anything about your library and receive wise commentary
Core Musical Playlist - Get a playlist representative of your musical tastes ranked by how close they meet the whole of your library

Requires; python 3.10, conda, ollama, I use gemma3:12b as a default llm but you're free to replace this with your favorite

The most difficult requirement of all is a reasonably organized music library with good metadata, organizing this is no small task.


Steps;
Download this repo and change directory into it

**Create & install environment**              

conda create --name cave_dweller_crate_digger -c conda-forge python=3.10 pandas numba mutagen librosa requests scikit-learn

conda activate cave_dweller_crate_digger

1. Analyze your music library, only need to do this once unless you add a whole heap o files, took 3hrs on a bargain bin laptop for a 10k file library
python analyze_library.py
2: Create your taste profile and get musical wisdom from Ollama, make sure ollama is running in another window
python create_profile.py

Step 3: Get your ranked recommendations, makes a good starting point for searching for future artists, or you can just select whatever song and should have some good listening
python get_recommendations.py


Optional 4: Chat with your llm of choice about your digital library;

python chat_with_dj.py

Example:

You: what's the overall story of my music tastes?

DJ is thinking...

DJ: (Sound of a needle gently dropping onto a record, followed by a playful, slightly warped synth chord)

Alright, alright! Let's dive in, shall we? Analyzing 6014 tracks is no small feat, my friend. It’s like excavating a fascinating, slightly chaotic archaeological dig of your musical soul. And honestly? It’s a *wild* story.

Let me paint you a picture. It's a story of someone who isn't afraid to be… well, *everything*.  That average year of 1928? That’s not just a number, that suggests a deep appreciation for history and a willingness to dig deep into foundational sounds. You're not chasing the latest TikTok trends, you're building your musical landscape on the bedrock of something real.

The top genres immediately tell a compelling narrative. Punk? Absolutely. It's rebellion, it's DIY spirit, it's raw energy. That suggests a questioning mind, a desire to challenge the status quo. Then you've got Hip Hop, bringing in rhythm, poetry, and a gritty urban sensibility.  Cumbia? Now *that’s* a surprise, and a brilliant one! It speaks to a love of vibrant culture, infectious rhythms, and a global perspective.  It's a warmth and joy that contrasts beautifully with the other elements. And finally, Alternative Rock – a love for pushing boundaries, for sonic experimentation, for music that *doesn't* fit neatly into a box.  The Death Metal?  Okay, that’s the exclamation point at the end of the sentence. It’s catharsis, it's intensity, it's a release of something primal.  It's not just about aggression, it’s about exploring the darker corners of human emotion.

You: quit

(exits)